[MUSIC PLAYING]
There have been
sages with visions
of ecological
apocalypse for hundreds,
if not thousands of years.
With those visions,
often comes a message
calling for increased
responsibility
in caring for our Earth.
A street brawler and
all-around roughneck,
David Milarch was an unlikely
recipient for such a message.
Yet, it came.
His story is one that leaves
us with a very clear directive
regarding the planet's
ancient trees--
trees for which many of us
feel a mystical connection.
"New York Times"
journalist, Jim Robbins,
learned of David's
story and made
the decision to chronicle
it in his book "The Man
Who Planted Trees."
And he's here with us today.
I cannot tell you how happy
I am to have you here.
Thank you.
This is a subject near and
dear not just to my heart
but to everybody in
the booth behind here
and almost everyone's heart.
There is something
about trees that
does have a nature to it
that pulls us into it, again,
almost on a mystical level.
Yet, we don't
understand why just yet,
and you have done a
lot of the leg work
to really document the
science of why that is
and what these trees
are doing for us.
Before we get to
the science, let's
talk about this incredible story
of Dave, the story of Dave.
Well, I wrote a story in
2001 in "The New York Times"
on something called The
Champion Tree Project,
which Dave Malarch ran.
He's a shade tree farmer
from Northern Michigan.
He grew up on a shade
tree farm there.
He started something
called The Champion Tree
Project, which I thought
was a great science
story for "The Times."
And so I did a piece,
and it got nice play
with five or six
pictures of great trees,
and it was on the cover of
the "Science Times" section,
and it led to more
press for their project,
The Champion Tree Project.
It led to "The Today Show"
and "Good Morning America,"
and so it really put him on
the map, and he was happy.
He said, I want to plant a tree.
I want to come to Helena,
Montana where you live
and plant a tree on the capitol
grounds, and I said, great.
So he showed up and came
to the door of my office
in downtown Helena, and he
said, I'm David Milarch,
and he stuck out
his hand, a big guy.
REGINA MEREDITH: Did he bear
wrestle you to the ground?
He's kind of like a bear, a big
guy, and he is a chain smoker.
So we stopped and had a couple
of cigarettes on the way
to the restaurant for lunch.
And I thought, well,
we'll talk about trees,
and we went into the
restaurant and sat down,
and he said, why did
you bring me here?
And he's looking around
this restaurant that's
a historic building in downtown
Helena, an old mining town,
and he said, I said,
what do you mean?
And he said, well, there's
spirits everywhere.
He said, there's a ghost over
there, a guy with a stick pin.
He's trying to tell me
where there's gold hidden,
and I'm going, wow,
what's going on here?
And then he turns to me,
and he says, you're lucky.
And I said, why?
He said, you're going to meet
your higher self tonight.
And I said, who--
REGINA MEREDITH: You didn't
expect this conversation
to go this way, I take it.
-Not at all.
I thought we were going to talk
about the science of trees.
And it turns out that David had
a near-death experience years
before and had stopped
drinking, and it sent his body
into shock, and he
was in the hospital,
came home, went into his
bad and then died, he said.
REGINA MEREDITH: What
was interesting is
that little part
you just brushed
through is he had
to make a decision.
His life was so out of control
from what your book says,
that he had actually
embarrassed his family.
He was embarrassing
his kids all the time,
and he made a decision
I'm putting my vodka
bottle outside the door.
JIM ROBBINS: That's right.
And I'm coming
out dead or sober.
He almost ended up dead.
JIM ROBBINS: That's right.
He's old school.
He was going to tough it out.
He was going to look the
devil in the eye, he said.
And he's going to put the
vodka and the six pack
outside the door,
and he was going
to-- he knew it was there,
and he wasn't going to go
through life running from it.
And he would do the same thing.
He would go down
to the bar after he
quit drinking every
day, have a pop,
and just because he wasn't
going to spend his life--
REGINA MEREDITH:
When you say a pop,
you mean he was having soda.
I
JIM ROBBINS: Soda pop, right.
Not a pop of something.
But going into the
bar because he--
again, to look the devil
in the eye and to say,
you're not going to beat me.
So this man had courage.
So this wasn't
exactly an accident
that this came his way.
But let's talk about
what happened after that.
After?
REGINA MEREDITH:
Well, then he died.
Then he died, and he came back.
REGINA MEREDITH: He
actually did die.
And said that-- and then
later he was visited by he said
was an angel.
He said he woke up one
day, and his bedroom
was filled with light
almost like there were
headlights aimed into the room.
REGINA MEREDITH: I love this
part of the story the way
that day came down.
Just to clarify it, he died
of essentially cirrhosis
of the liver and
toxicities of some kind
related to alcoholism.
Right, his chest cavity
was filling up with fluids.
REGINA MEREDITH: Fluids, right.
Fluid was pressing
on his heart,
and his hear was stopping.
REGINA MEREDITH: Yeah, and so
he died, and in this scenario,
he went to the place that
most people who report--
JIM ROBBINS: The imaginal realm.
The place that most people that
report near-death experiences
go to-- went through the light,
went to this beautiful place
on the other side.
JIM ROBBINS: Tunnel of light.
Unconditional love.
JIM ROBBINS: He said
the tunnel of light
had a blue and pink
helix like DNA in it
as he went through the tunnel
and came to spirit beings,
light beings, angels, and they
told him it wasn't his time,
and he had to go back.
They didn't tell them at
the time about the trees,
but then it was months later
when he woke up in his bedroom
in the middle of
the night, and they
told him to get a pad
of paper and a pen
and go out to this
chair in the living room
and to write down some things,
and he said, next thing he knew
it was 6:00 AM, and
he ad an outline of 10
pages on a yellow legal pad.
REGINA MEREDITH: But
he had no real memory
of anything that occurred
during that time, right?
JIM ROBBINS: No, no memory.
And he showed it to his wife and
his wife said, you can't write,
you can't spell.
You didn't do this.
And there he had the
outlines of a project.
And he told his son,
his oldest son Jared,
and together they started
The Champion Tree Project.
But let's back up
and talk about some
of what he was
shown, and we don't
have to stay linear in time.
What was he shown the potential
was if he did not do this
and others did not
participate in recovering
the health of the forest?
Was he shown any
future scenarios,
and what it would be like?
I don't think he was shown, at
least not that I've been told,
visual things about the future.
But he has been told
that the trees are
important that tough
times are coming--
Earth changes are coming,
severe weather, earthquakes,
those kinds of things.
And that the trees
have been so fragmented
and so injured by our
actions that a lot of them
need to be moved.
The genetics are so
important in the old trees
that they need to be
moved out of one place
and put in three or four places
to assure that they will carry
on and those genetics
will be around as we start
to rebuild after what's coming.
He said he knows what's going
to happen in the future,
and sometimes he's kind of
cagey about what he's been told
or shown, but he says that
the outcome is not acceptable,
and he's here to change that.
And you're here to change that
because you partnered with him,
and whether you like it or not,
you got swept into this vortex
of Dave's world that you
probably could never have
dreamed of before
when you were just
doing straight science writing.
JIM ROBBINS: That's right.
And the interesting
thing for me is
that it works on a lot of levels
is that there is good science
or a good lack of science
to show that we don't know
very much about trees at all.
What we do know is
that they are very
important and probably much
more important than we know.
And then we can start there
at the very basic stuff,
and then we can go all
the way up to the fact
that trees may be antennas
for divine energy.
And we are going to
go all the way there
by the end of the conversation,
if you don't mind.
But let's talk
about the cloning.
Once he looked at these 10
pages that he had written,
were written by his hand
but someone else writing
through him, what kind of
protocol or prescription
was on those papers?
And then how did he began that?
Because I have some
really essential questions
about cloning versus
taking clippings--
transplants and all.
Well, the word cloning
is a loaded term,
and it isn't necessarily
a loaded term.
And all that means
is that a clone means
a replica-- 100% genetic copy.
And so all that means is
taking a snipping from a tree,
taking a six-inch
cutting, and what they do
is they scrape a little
blue bark off of the bottom,
and they root it
in a soil medium.
And those roots start to grow.
And so what you have is 100%
genetic copy of the tree
made through common
horticultural means,
not through manipulation
of genetics or something
like that.
And by the way, the
roots when they start
to take on the bottom of some
of these trees, a lot of experts
said these trees are too old.
They're not vigorous
enough to grow roots
and to start new
trees, and David
says, where his angelic helpers
help is forming those new roots
because at that
level, they can cause
those roots to appear because
they're so small and fine.
REGINA MEREDITH: So it's really
susceptible to finer energies.
JIM ROBBINS: Right.
Subtle energies.
Yeah, that make sense.
What-- at this
point, I would like
to know why they chose
to do it that way
rather than to gather seeds
and replicate through seeds.
Well, because a seed is not
100% genetic copy of a tree.
If you find an acorn
under an oak tree,
that acorn is probably
an offspring of the tree
that it's near.
But that tree was pollinated
by other trees that may
not have been champion trees.
And so David was looking to
find the cream of the crop
when it came in genetics, and
that means a champion tree,
on that had been
scored and recorded
in the National Register of
Big Trees as the champion
of that species.
And there is a National
Register of Big Trees,
and each tree, the
largest specimen of each,
is recorded in that book.
And it's interesting because
as you said before, there was
some scientific debate as
to whether that was wise
because some of the champions,
of course, were old, even,
well, we could say past
their prime, prime.
Yet, as you say,
they were getting
some kind of other help.
So those genetics transcended
the age of the parents,
so to speak.
Yes, and the other thing that
people-- critics have said
is that, well, these
trees may not be
the best tree of their species.
Maybe they grew in a place
where the soil was good,
or it was wetter, or
something like that,
but we don't have anything to go
on because tree genetics aren't
well studied, and trees
aren't well-studied,
and so it's a good place
to start, I thought.
And every scientist that I
talked to said, it makes sense.
Protect them.
They are like people who
have smoked all our lives,
drank all their lives,
and live to be 95.
Why wouldn't you protect those
in an archive and study them?
Exactly, OK, now,
with that, that was
the beginning of the project.
And so he did start going
about what was prescribed.
He was trying to create
various partnerships it sounds
like with educational
institutions, universities,
banged his head
against the wall.
A lot of them were
not even remotely
interested in his project.
So we can guess that this
project of this man, who
was being viewed as a visionary,
or crackpot, whichever way,
maybe a little bit of both, had
some hard going to get going.
And we're going to talk
about how it ended up.
Because the story really
goes in a beautiful place.
But before that, let's get
into some of the actual nature
of trees themselves.
As a tree lover, I love
the part of your book
where you talk about
the aerosol effects
from trees, which most of
us have never considered.
And like many things
in the tree world,
it's not well-studied.
There are some studies that
show that these aerosols
that trees emit are very
important to the world,
but there aren't many.
And so it's kind
of amazing to me
that science is not seen fit to
study this perhaps because it
doesn't make money or
it's not on the A list
of things that are
being studied--
genetics and things like that.
But it turns out that a lot
of the aerosol that comes
from trees, the chemicals that
come from trees in the form
of very fine particulates,
especially when it's
warm-- the warmer it gets,
the more aerosolizing
a tree does-- a lot of
them are very powerful
anti-fungals, antibiotics,
chemo-preventatives, limonene
is a chemopreventative.
It's one of the big things
that comes out of trees.
Perillyl is a chemopreventative.
Methyl jasmonate is a
chemopreventative in cancer
treatment, anti-cancer
compound, as is limonene.
So you have all these chemicals
that have not been well-studied
being aerosolized,
and there's probably
dozens of these different
trees, pinene from pine trees.
And nobody knows
what role they play.
And so I'm not saying that
science has said these things
prevent cancer if we
walk in the forest
or if we live around
trees, but that's certainly
a question that's raised, and
I would like to see it studied,
and I don't know why
it has been studied.
And so one of the reasons
I wrote this in the book
was that people will
take this seriously.
Now, one of the compounds
I think is really important
is acetylsalicylic acid,
which is of course,
where aspirin came from.
REGINA MEREDITH:
Yeah, the willow tree.
Right.
And there's 300 to
400 species of willows
in the Northern Hemisphere
around the world
that line waterways.
And so you have the chemical
that created aspirin.
And aspirin, by the way,
is not just for headaches.
Aspirin has been shown in
very good studies, published
studies, many different studies,
to be an anti-cancer compound.
It prevents prostate.
It prevents bladder cancer.
I mean, on and on--
REGINA MEREDITH: That's
not commonly known.
JIM ROBBINS: That's
REGINA MEREDITH: Why
would that not be--
JIM ROBBINS: It's been reported
in "The New York Times"
and many other publications.
REGINA MEREDITH:
So now, would this
be true of the willow bark?
Because you can go to
a health food store
and get the willow
bark, which is I
guess, a closer derivative
from the original substance.
JIM ROBBINS: No, I think this I
think what people have studied
is they've studied aspirin.
REGINA MEREDITH: Aspirin.
OK.
As a chemo preventative--
as a cancer preventative,
and aspirin has been
shown to be something
of a miracle drug in terms
of its prevention of cancer.
REGINA MEREDITH: I was surprised
to read that in your book.
I had never heard that.
JIM ROBBINS: Yeah,
and so-- so what's
happening when willows line
waterways and they take up
water through their
system, they're essentially
washing the water with
this chemical compound
and then aerosolizing
it into the atmosphere.
So our willows is kind of not
only disinfecting this water,
but also creating a
medicine of sorts for us
if we drink the water,
if the fish swim in it,
or if animals drink
it-- wildlife drink it.
Does the sun somehow
potentize this compound
so that's even more powerful
along the lines of homeopathy?
Well, we don't
know these things.
But what I do in the book is
kind of talk to people who
believe that is the case,
and hopefully, science
will at some point take
it seriously and say,
this is really important.
Absolutely, and
empirically, if you camp out
in the forest, which I love
the redwoods in particular,
you can imagine if
you were just to stay
there for an extra
few days, you come
out with a new lease on life.
There's a reason for that.
And as you're
saying, you're being
bathed in all these chemicals.
But you're also being
bathed in information, which
we'll get to in just a moment.
But one of the parts you
wrote about in the book
was the Sierra Nevada
where they have
been able to
determine the presence
of 120 different chemicals.
JIM ROBBINS: Right.
REGINA MEREDITH: However, they
can't even identify-- well,
they can identify 70 of them.
That's a huge percentage that
they cannot even identify.
That's right.
And so one of the
themes of the book
is the questions that science
doesn't-- science doesn't ask.
And there are a lot
of questions when
it comes to trees that
science has never even asked.
And this is one of them is what
role these chemicals play not
only with regard to
anti-cancer in people,
but what role it plays--
the chemical ecology
plays with wildlife--
bees, for example.
Now, we have this problem
of colony collapse disorder.
REGINA MEREDITH: Yes.
JIM ROBBINS: Well,
it might be a virus.
It might be a parasite.
But maybe it's the fact that
nature isn't robust enough,
and so the chemicals that these
anti-fungal, antibacterial,
and anti-cancer
compounds-- the bees
aren't getting enough of
them when they go from flower
to flower or tree to
tree, and they're not
able to prevent these diseases.
I mean, pollinators, if you
think about bats, if you think
about bees, and you think about
birds that spend their time
in trees, they're getting
showered with antivirals,
anti-fungals, anti-bacteria.
And so perhaps its preventing
all of these things
from occurring in these very
important species to us.
We have white nose virus now
that's broken out in bats.
REGINA MEREDITH: What is that?
It's a virus that's
killing millions of bats
all over the country.
They don't know why.
It's really alarming.
And it's just hit the
West, but it's happened
a lot through the East Coast.
Well, is it because there
aren't enough of these robust
compounds out there because
we have suburbs and cities
and farm fields where we don't
have the right kinds of trees
that have these compounds?
I think there's-- I think
it's a place to look.
REGINA MEREDITH: I think so too.
And let's go back to the health
effects while we're on that.
Let's talk about the study,
the NIPPON study of the 12
healthy man in Japan--
JIM ROBBINS: Right.
A little bit about that.
Tell us what happened in that.
Well, in Japan, they take,
and in other countries--
Korea and in other countries--
REGINA MEREDITH: Russia.
-Russia.
They take the idea of the health
effects of trees and forests
very seriously.
And they've done studies.
There's a whole field of
environmental medicine there
that looks at this
kind of thing.
They have studies which they
did pre and post studies, where
they would test cortisol levels
in healthy men in the city,
and then they would test NK
cells, which are natural killer
cells in the immune system
that kill viruses, and cancer,
and things like that.
And they're very important
to keeping us healthy,
and then they would measure
those after a couple
of days in the city.
They would measure those after
a couple of days in the forest,
and they found that
cortisol, a stress chemical,
went down after a couple
of days in the forest,
but went up in the cities.
And NK cells, which are
important to keeping people
healthy, a number of NK
cells went up in the forest
and down in the cities.
So trees have a role to
play in keeping people
healthy-- trees and forests.
Now, no one knows what the
active ingredient, as it were,
of these trees are.
It might be these phytoncides,
which are the chemicals that
come from trees that
keep us healthy,
but there might be
other things that work.
People I've talked to who study
this in the United States--
the University of Illinois
at Champaign-Urbana
is one place that does
quite a bit of this--
think it might have something
to do with attention
that when we're
in the city, there
are a lot of man-made objects.
There's cars.
There's buildings.
There's other people, and
we have to pay attention.
We have to do a
lot of processing
in the brain to sort it all out.
But when we go to
a forest, we're
not focused on any one thing.
We allow our attention
to relax and, of course,
when your attention is
a very critical part.
It's a nerve of
the whole system,
our whole psychological system.
So when you pay
attention differently,
your whole body responds.
REGINA MEREDITH: And
you tend to breathe.
JIM ROBBINS: You
tend to breathe.
Your muscles relax.
Everything changes.
There's a system-wide
response from a change
in how we pay attention.
So it might be
something like that.
E.O. Wilson, the famous
biologist from Harvard,
coined the term biophilia
that we evolved forests,
and so there might be some
deep, perhaps unknown, effect
that we have when
we're in nature,
because that's
where we came from.
And let's talk about that.
That's not so much the case now.
Let's talk about-- let's
just take North America.
We have people watching
from all over the world.
But let's take North America.
This was a very heavily
forested country at one time.
JIM ROBBINS: Right.
And let's talk about
the decimation in terms
of what percentage of old
growth existed even up till 100,
150 years ago and
what exists now
so we can get an
idea of what we have
been-- what we had deprived
ourselves of as a species.
Right.
And I think 90-- more than
95% of the old growth forest
is gone, and again, we
evolved in old growth forest.
And some people-- I read an
interesting book about forests.
And some people think
it was driven by fear
that as European
settlers came from Europe
and settled in the US,
they came from a place
where there were stories
of witches and werewolves
and things, and the
first thing they did
was clear the land to
make it open and light.
And so deforestation happened
very quickly on the East Coast.
REGINA MEREDITH:
Well, it reflected
what happened in England.
JIM ROBBINS: Right.
And so it was the way of
the world at the time,
and it happened very
fast, and I and I think,
again, it brings me back to I
think one of my central points
is those forests and trees
are kind of eco technology.
Those great forests may have
drawn in water with something
called the theory
of the abiotic pump
may have drawn in
water from the oceans
and kept the interior of
the climate cool and moist.
REGINA MEREDITH: Oh,
and you speak of that,
you're speaking of
the coastal redwoods.
JIM ROBBINS: The
coastal redwoods.
What were the coastal redwoods?
I mean, is there
anyone that has ever
witnessed a redwood that hasn't
fall in love with a redwood?
These are the most magnificent
creatures on the planet.
I mean, arguably,
the bristlecone pine
is magnificent.
It's even older than some of
the eldest of the redwoods.
But let's talk about
what happened with them.
$2.50 an acre-- it's yours, and
those acres were cleared of 97%
of the old growth redwoods,
which about makes you
want to cry to think that
was just in public hands,
corporations.
And what's left is at risk.
I mean, one of the things that's
happened in the last 50 years
is that the period of time
when the redwood forests are
surrounded by fog has
declined about 30%,
and they are fog drinkers.
REGINA MEREDITH: Yes.
JIM ROBBINS: And they take the
water in through their needles
and through the fog banks.
And so I mean, when you
start to look around and look
at the threats to trees and
the way things are changing,
it's daunting.
REGINA MEREDITH: It is daunting.
JIM ROBBINS: It's worrisome.
I mean, I came to this whole
subject through the fact
that I live on 15 acres of
ponderosa pine near Helena,
Montana, and they started
dying in 2004 I think it was,
and four years later,
they were all dead.
And we cut them all down, and
we have some around the house
that we would save
through spring,
but they died, and there
was nothing we could do.
And when trees start dying,
they can die very fast,
and there's nothing you can do.
REGINA MEREDITH:
Yes, entire forest.
What about the
Rockies-- the Rocky
Mountains, the forests of the
Rocky Mountains right now?
Well, what's happened
in the Rockies
from the bristlecone pines,
to the lodgepole pines
of Colorado, to the ponderosa
pines of Montana and Idaho,
what's happened is it's
gotten much warmer.
The Western United
States is warming
faster than anywhere else.
And where I live,
every year would
be two to three weeks,
sometimes more, of 30 to 40
below zero weather.
Well, this year, we had
no below zero weather.
REGINA MEREDITH: Right.
And that's what it takes to
kill pests that kill trees.
REGINA MEREDITH: See, that's
a really important part.
In the Rockies, as you
wrote in your book,
have the average
winter temperature
is up about 15 to 20 degrees
over what it was in the past.
JIM ROBBINS: That's right.
The coldest it gets--
the wintertime minimum
temperatures-- the
average wintertime minimum
temperature-- has gone
up about 20 degrees,
and in the world of climate
science, that's unheard of.
I mean, things don't
change that much that fast.
I mean, the average
temperature in the West,
which is warming faster
than anywhere else,
has gone up two degrees.
But the wintertime minimums
have gone up 15 to 20,
and its startling.
REGINA MEREDITH: That
was quite shocking.
It's startling.
And that's what killed my trees.
That's what's killing
the bristlecone pines.
The bristlecone pines have
been around for 5,000 years,
and they are dying,
and they will all die.
And they are looking now
for resistant trees in hopes
of growing new ones,
but these are trees
like Methusela, Prometheus.
These are trees
that have been named
and have their own personality.
REGINA MEREDITH: In a little
bit, we'll take a break,
but when we come back,
I want to actually
talk about what the story
of Prometheus , for example.
I mean these trees have
brought up such deep commitment
and emotions of
the people who've
been dedicated to trying to
save them and for good reason.
Again, imagine a tree
that has been living
since the early days of the
pharaohs of Egypt, for example,
continuously fighting off
elements, fighting off
every kind of pest that has
come its way, every kind
or-- and climate change
has happened before.
This is not the first
time we go through periods
where it's hotter, it's colder.
And something in them has had an
intelligence to be able to make
it all the way through.
JIM ROBBINS: But this time
something's different.
REGINA MEREDITH:
What's happened?
What's different now?
Well, it's getting warmer.
It's getting warmer faster, and
of course, it's only started.
I mean, the next 100 years,
the prediction for warming
is unprecedented in
the geological record.
But maybe there's
something else going on.
Maybe there's other
factors at work.
I don't know.
But whatever it is, we can't
afford to sit around and wait
and see if trees survive.
I think what David
Milarch is doing
and what many other
people could do
and are doing who have gotten
interested in this is start
to help these things survive.
REGINA MEREDITH: Absolutely
There's a project in Norway
that takes seeds from plants
from around the world and
put them in a vault. Well,
you can't do that
as easily with trees
because they have to grow,
but essentially, his project
is the equivalent
of that, making
sure these things survive
by taking the redwoods
and planting them all
around the world--
France, England, whatever.
REGINA MEREDITH: I mean,
it's so heartwarming.
We're going to talk about
that more in just a moment.
When we come back, we're
also going to talk about how
trees talk to each other.
[MUSIC  PLAYING]
We are back talking about one
of my very favorite subjects,
trees, and I would like you
while we're showing the picture
of Prometheus to tell us a
little bit about the lore
and story of what
happened around this tree
in terms of activism, and
emotion, and everything.
JIM ROBBINS: Well,
Prometheus was a tree.
It was growing back in the
'60s, and a young student who
was doing work on
climate ring, tree ring
studies, studying
climate, got his coring
drill stuck in a tree.
He was trying to take
out many years of records
to see how the
climate had changed.
And it was an expensive
drill from Sweden,
and it got stuck in the tree,
and he didn't want to lose it.
And he asked the
Forest Service if he
could cut the tree down to
get the drill out, and he did.
And he took a slice of the
tree and went back to his hotel
in a little town of
Baker outside of what is
now Great Basin National Park.
And he counted the rings, and
he got up to 4,900 and something
and stopped and realized
that the tree was
probably over 5,000 years old.
REGINA MEREDITH: Beautiful.
JIM ROBBINS: And probably
the oldest tree in the world.
REGINA MEREDITH: And he had cut
it down to save a drill bit.
JIM ROBBINS: Core drill.
Not knowing, of course.
REGINA MEREDITH: Not knowing.
JIM ROBBINS: The oldest.
And so it led-- it
caused a lot of outrage.
People wrote articles, and a lot
of times these kinds of things
are what it takes to get people
mobilized to do something.
And it led to a campaign to
protect the bristlecone pines.
Great Basin National
Park was created.
REGINA MEREDITH:
I remember that.
JIM ROBBINS: Protected
areas in the White Mountains
of California-- also
protected Methuselah
and the old trees there.
The same thing happened
with the sequoias.
Someone cut down a sequoia
tree and took the bark off
to take to New York to
show as at a sideshow,
and people were outraged.
They killed the tree
and took the bark
and left the-- it
was called Mother,
and they left the tree
standing or naked, and it died.
And it caused such outrage,
that it led to protection
of the sequoias and
state parks there
and in Sequoia National Park.
REGINA MEREDITH: Yes,
it was a beautiful.
General Sherman is one
of my favorite trees.
He's the famous one
that anybody will see,
and you're not allowed
to take any bark off--
JIM ROBBINS: That's right.
REGINA MEREDITH:
General Sherman.
Let's talk about what
happened with him as, well,
actually, I'd like about
the yew tree and a couple
of other species of tree
just really briefly,
and again, I was
going to ask you
earlier how this feeds
back into what it's doing
in cooperation with humankind.
Am I recalling correctly
that the yew tree
is the one that has the taxol?
JIM ROBBINS: Yes.
REGINA MEREDITH: Yes, OK.
Which has been made
into a cancer drug.
It is used for breast cancer and
several other types of cancer
as a treatment.
REGINA MEREDITH:
Yeah, OK, I wanted
to get that one in because we
didn't talk about that, again,
just giving the healing credits
for their healing effects
to the trees.
We already talked
about the limonene.
Now, I'd like to go
into some of the other
what you would almost call more
esoteric aspects of the trees.
And that has to
do with the notion
that trees are communicating
information to each other.
JIM ROBBINS: Before I do that,
I want to make one other comment
about these compounds.
REGINA MEREDITH: Yes, please.
There is a guy in Bozeman,
Montana, who I've interviewed,
who studies what are
called endophytic fungi,
and these are fungi that grow
with trees, very old trees,
and these fungi are
symbiotic with the tree.
And they create
compounds that are
different than the
compounds the trees create,
and they create
antibiotic compounds,
and they essentially are
there to help the tree,
and the tree gives them a
place to live essentially.
And one of these compounds
that he researched,
and again, these kinds of things
are not well studied in trees.
There's tens of
thousands of compounds--
both the chemical
compounds in the tree
and these endophytic fungi
that have properties that
are absolutely novel
and can be explored
for a whole range of things.
They might be the
next antibiotic
to treat MRSA, the infection
that is antibiotic resistant.
There is some belief that it is.
But one of the compounds,
one of the fungi he found,
can produce diesel
fuel inside the tree.
REGINA MEREDITH: Really?
Inside the tree.
JIM ROBBINS: And it can be--
they think it was used to help
the tree ward off
infection, but he's
growing diesel fuel using this
fungus in the lab in Bozeman
at MSU.
And it's just one of those
things that is absolutely
incredible when you
talk about trees,
and no one knows, and our
knowledge is absolutely
in its infancy in this regard.
But it's the kind of thing I
think needs to be pointed out,
and people need to know that
this is a possibility before we
cut the forest down, we
need to know what trees can
do in a whole range of things.
REGINA MEREDITH: And we don't
stop to think that not only are
we going in after
the really valuable
stuff in cutting the redwoods.
But the redwoods can't survive
unless they have various pines
next to them, for example.
I mean, these trees
live in community.
JIM ROBBINS: Right, we have
to understand these systems.
REGINA MEREDITH: Yeah, the
whole notion of the edge effect.
I think you wrote that there is
only about a 10,000 acre patch
left of the redwoods,
the coastal redwoods,
up where Rockefeller--
the Rockefeller Preserve
is, which Albee
Creek campground--
it's a beautiful area.
But that doesn't mean that
they'll actually survive
because you have
this edge effect
where there has to be a buffer
zone and protective mechanisms.
Can you explain that?
In large-scale
forests, the interior
might be many degrees cooler
than the edges of the forest.
And the edges of the forest
may die off because it's warmer
there, and but that's
OK because the interior
the forest is cooler,
and it maintains itself,
but when you have all edge
when essentially there is no--
REGINA MEREDITH: You
have a strip, yeah.
--tinterior of the
forest to keep cool, then
you can lose the whole forest.
REGINA MEREDITH:
Right, and we're
not thinking about the
complexity in nature, even
just-- even just from
a root point of view
with the redwoods having
a 300-foot tall tree
that has maybe what?
Four to six-foot deep roots,
but they cling to each other
and are protected
by other species.
And they came in and cut all
those other species down.
JIM ROBBINS: Right.
REGINA MEREDITH: You have now a
naked patch with no protection.
JIM ROBBINS: And no one knows
how the root systems of trees
are related.
In fact, it's called
the rhizosphere,
and the rhizosphere
is probably the least
known aspect of the tree.
And there's a whole universe,
much more complicated
than the above ground
part of the tree.
And it plays a huge role.
I think one of the most
interesting things I researched
for the book was
something called
phytoremediation where
they use trees to clean
up dry cleaning solvents.
They use trees to
clean up radionuclides.
They use trees to clean
up gasoline, diesel,
trees can take in the
most toxic of waste,
and through the
root system, they
have something called
a microbial zone
right around each root.
It's about as wide
as your finger,
and it's densely
packed with microbes.
And these microbes take
in these toxic wastes,
and they neutralize it so
the tree can use the water,
and then they disappear.
REGINA MEREDITH: And you're
not talking about just
chopping a tree down
and making sawdust
out of it to mop up something.
JIM ROBBINS: No, no.
REGINA MEREDITH: You're
talking about a very
sophisticated mechanism.
JIM ROBBINS: The living
tree is a miracle
in technology, eco technology.
Living trees are truly miracles.
Cutting down a tree for wood is
probably the least enlightened
use of it.
It probably-- it benefits the
person who cuts the tree down
and processes it,
but the multitude
of benefits that come from
trees that benefit everyone,
disappear.
And so it's really
trading-- it's
trading off this
incredible technology
for a paltry handful of coins.
REGINA MEREDITH: Absolutely.
I mean, it's very sad.
REGINA MEREDITH: It is very sad.
JIM ROBBINS: And tragic.
It is tragic.
And they're losing also the
information-- information
and familial structure
of tree colonies, which
is now finally being validated.
I just 30 years ago--
a mystical source
of information I had
access to explained--
was talking to me about forests.
This just proceeded my doing
a documentary, which started
about the same time you very--
the very beginning of your work
began on the Sierra
Nevada mountain range.
And one thing they said I
thought was just fascinating
was that it was not well
understood, in fact, not at all
understood, that
trees and forests
operate in a very similar
fashion to tribes and families.
It takes multi generations
passing this knowledge from one
to another, and the
information would then
be inculcated into the
younger generations,
and they would have the
wisdom and knowledge
to uptake whatever
needed to be taken up,
and defend against
this and that,
and to work in companionship
with other species
in the forest to do that.
And when you clear cut
a forests, and they say,
oh, no, it's all
being remediated.
They said, when you see
those little trees, that's
like looking at a bunch of
little orphan children trying
to raise themselves with
no guidance and no parents.
Now, I bring that up because
I talked with you off camera,
and you're saying there is now
some evidence that's saying
this is true scientifically.
JIM ROBBINS: When
it comes to trees,
the mystics and the poets are
way ahead of the scientists.
REGINA MEREDITH: Yes.
-They know what's going.
Trees talk to them and
tell them what's going on.
And one of the things that a
researcher in British Columbia
has discovered, again, after the
fact, because the mystics were
on to this a long time ago,
is that there's a mother tree,
and there are daughter and
son trees, and trees pass
nutrients and connect to these
trees throughout the forest.
I mean, her vision
of it-- science is
limited by what it can study.
But her research kind
of gets at the idea.
It doesn't establish this
more complicated relationship,
but it gets at the idea that
shows us something is going on.
REGINA MEREDITH: Who was he--
I have it written in my notes
somewhere, but I have
so many pages of notes
it couldn't fit it all on here.
There was a man who
was writing about this,
I think it may have
been a decade ago,
a scientist from one
of the universities
talking about the
talking trees--
how trees talk to each other.
They ran him out of town
on the rails, didn't they?
JIM ROBBINS: Right, they did.
And he went and opened
a bed and breakfast
after he was ridiculed for
his talking trees theory.
But what goes around comes
around, and what's happened
is that other scientists
have picked this up.
And what they've
realized is that we
didn't have the equipment
to study some of these.
These are hormones
that trees put out.
A lot of the signaling
between trees is hormonal.
And one guy in particular
that I interviewed
has studied sagebrush,
which is a tree.
And there's a compound
called methyl jasmonate
that these sagebrush
put out to warn
other-- methyl
jasmonate, by the way,
is an anti-cancer compound.
REGINA MEREDITH: Is that's
something we have access to?
Yeah, you can buy it.
REGINA MEREDITH: Then
what form does it come in.
I think it just
comes in liquid,
but although, I'm
not sure about that.
That's a good question.
REGINA MEREDITH: OK, OK.
But he found that there's
a very complex and subtle
signaling processes--
REGINA MEREDITH:
In the sagebrush.
--that takes
place between trees.
REGINA MEREDITH: Oh, I see.
And if a grasshopper
attacks one tree,
that tree will signal
other trees about the need
to prepare a chemical
defense for the grasshopper,
and so it draws this
anti-grasshopper compound
into its leaves to protect
against, perhaps a bitter taste
or something, to the insects.
So that's one thing
they know about it.
But I think, again,
what really struck
me was the scientist
said, one, we're
just developing some of the
equipment needed to measure
this stuff because it
happens, in his quote,
it's ridiculously low levels.
I mean, this is really
hard to measure.
And again, this is what
science and trees--
the relationship has always
been kind of difficult.
They haven't asked
the right questions,
and I talked to a
scientist who said,
you know, maybe someday we'll
be able to answer questions, not
just the questions we
can ask, or not just
the questions we can
answer, and scientists
have a tendency to do that.
They only ask the questions
they can answer, of course,
because that's all they can do.
But the biggest question of
all that I've wondered about
is do we live in a sacred world?
Trees seem to indicate we do.
They're very powerful--
very emotional
to people who have this
emotional relationship
with them.
And so what more
important question
can you ask than are
the trees sacred,
and is the world sacred.
And yet, scientists
can't measure.
REGINA MEREDITH: Not very many.
Cleve Baxter managed to get a
glimpse anyway into that world,
and maybe this
would be a good time
to talk about the
emotions of plants,
and one would have to extend
that certainly to trees.
Well, he found that when he
pounded a nail into one tree,
that there seemed to be some
sort of signal that is sent out
to other trees that
indicated that they were
communicating whether
pain or shock or something
to other trees.
REGINA MEREDITH:
Distress, yes, mhm.
You know, the
science there is not
as good as some other
science along those lines.
REGINA MEREDITH: Well, we have
Rupert Sheldrake and his ilk.
Ruper Sheldrake-- very
interesting that there is this
morphogenetic field or
field of intelligence
around trees that guide them. .
One of the mainstream
things about trees
and how they communicate
mainstream science things
is that trees-- when one tree
gains immunity from a disease,
it passes that immunity
on to other trees
of the same species around it.
There's a term for it.
I can't think of it.
But that's well established, and
so there is a lot of indication
that trees are communicating
with each other
whether it's hormonal
through the root
system or something else.
REGINA MEREDITH:
Let's talk about it
on an even grander scale.
And I think you touched on
this just for a second or two
at the top of the hour.
And we were looking at the
notion of trees as antennas,
as both receivers and
transmitters, as providing
some invaluable
service to all living
systems between the
cosmos and the Earth.
Maybe you can share
a little bit of that.
JIM ROBBINS: Right,
and that's what I would
call informed speculation.
I mean, we do know that
trees have a charge.
They've measured it.
There is some
device that someone
invented that actually captures
the electricity from a tree.
REGINA MEREDITH: An
electrical charge, yeah.
JIM ROBBINS: Right.
And you can use
the use electricity
to run an early warning system
to warn about fires and just
the electricity
that the tree emits
is enough to run those systems.
So trees do have a charge.
They do have electrical charge.
That's well known.
And then there are the mystics,
the shamans around the world,
who believe that
trees can receive
and send divine energies.
We have the Bodhi tree
that Buddha sat under.
Was he receiving?
Was that his antenna?
Was he receiving
information from the tree
or from the cosmos-- from
another star system perhaps?
That's probably
that kind of thing
will be settled
well by the mystics.
But one of the
things I learned--
a published paper in I think
it's called "New Phytology"--
is that perhaps the biggest
factor in a tree's growth
isn't moisture.
It's not light.
It's something called
galactic cosmic rays.
It's one paper that
was done in Scotland
by mainstream scientists.
REGINA MEREDITH: How long ago?
I would say a
year, perhaps two.
REGINA MEREDITH: Oh,
so it's relatively new.
I'd like to read that.
Google "galactic
cosmic rays and trees,"
and it'll come up-- one
of the first things.
REGINA MEREDITH: OK, all right.
And what they found is that
these high-energy particles,
which no one really
knows what they are
or what they do that come from
the outer reaches of the galaxy
affect tree growth.
And one of their speculation
is that these particles might
create clouds , more
cloud formation,
and so it diffuses the light.
And so it's important
to the trees.
Who knows?
But it's interesting that
there's something going
on there, and it's a mystery.
Well, it sounds like
this man, Lawrence
Edwards, new something.
I mean, he was keeping track
of these cosmological cycles
for quite a long time.
I've never heard this.
I thought it was
absolutely fascinating.
He was stating that
certain species of trees
react a certain way or
behave a certain way
under certain astrological
configurations
when the moon and the sun and
Venus or whatnot are aligned.
Can you talk about that?
Because he was really
detailed in his research.
He was a teacher at
a school in Scotland.
a Steiner school.
He was a follower.
REGINA MEREDITH: Oh,
well there you go.
He was a follower of Rudolf
Steiner, who of course,
postulated this idea that
there was this energy grid that
governed everything essentially,
and the trees and the planets
were connected through this
grid, this invisible grid.
And so Edwards, who wrote
several books about Steiner's
work, for years
meticulously recorded
the position of the planets
and the positions of the buds
on the trees.
And he found that
when say Saturn was
in a certain position, that
the buds of the oak trees
would flatten out, and then
when Saturn moved on, then
they would sharpen.
It was subtle, but
it was unmistakable.
There were a number of trees,
different species of trees,
and a number of different
planets that when they aligned,
would cause this
change in the tree.
And it went on for 30 years.
He studied this.
It's still going on.
They are still studying this.
And there's a backyard study.
It was done by one man.
It's been carried out by one
man who was a friend of Edwards.
But it shows that,
again, mainstream science
isn't going to study this.
REGINA MEREDITH: No.
It's left to someone who
has a passionate interest
in it, who studied it, and shows
there is something going on.
The only place he did not
find this impact on trees
was underneath a power
line that somehow--
REGINA MEREDITH:
That makes sense.
That would have knocked it out.
-Right.
It blocked.
REGINA MEREDITH: Right,
no subtle frequencies
would get through.
It blocked the subtle
energies from reaching the tree
or from helping the tree connect
to the energy from the planet.
REGINA MEREDITH: Yeah,
that would make sense.
Well, speaking of
not-so-subtle energies,
what about the solar effects?
I mean, we know that we're
going through a period of time
of increased solar activity.
We're going to the
galactic center,
if you're looking at
through the 2012 lens.
Can we look at how all
of that might be playing
into these systems whether it's
to give new life-- whether it's
changing time, a shape
shifting time as one of-- You
know what I'm saying?
JIM ROBBINS: Not exactly.
How does the sun
figure-- how do
the solar cycles figures into
all of this as far as you know?
Or has any study
been done on it?
You know, I've not
heard of any studies.
I mean, we're entering
into the study
where we're going to
have more coronal mass
ejections and things like that.
You know, I haven't
heard anything
that would indicate
that things are going
to change because of that.
Logically, they would.
The soil may change.
We may see more aerosols
and things like that.
But as far as I know,
that's not been studied.
REGINA MEREDITH:
Interesting yeah,
it's a different kind of
information they're taking in.
It's affecting us.
JIM ROBBINS: Right.
It has to be
affecting the trees.
It's affecting our
computers and our brains.
It has to be
affecting this forest.
I didn't know if there
is any research on that.
I wanted to just on the mystical
theme element of this just
make a comment to there's
a woman I interviewed.
I've interviewed
her probably two
or three times now called
Dr. Manjusha [INAUDIBLE].
And she was an MD who
happened to have a passion
for the sciences in
general-- is just
a natively brilliant woman.
She was actually
sitting in a tree,
and now I have to ask
her what kind of tree
it was in England
when suddenly, she
was swept into another
field, so to speak,
and shown the black hole
theory-- everything.
I mean, it was all revealed
to her in this tree in what
probably only took
place in a few minutes
but spurned on massive
amounts of research
into the black hole
theory, much of what
Nassim Haramein
works with as well.
And when you were
talking, it just
flashed on me that was a tree
where it happened with her.
So I'm going to call
her, write to her,
and find out what tree it
was, and I'll let you know.
Meanwhile, let's
talk about druids.
Let's talk about the druidic
tradition and our future.
Well, the druids
of Ireland believe
that trees were mystical and
a connection to the divine.
Their alphabet, the
Ogham, each letter
was named after a
different species of tree.
The Brehan law, which
is centuries old
was handed down by the druids.
It was a way of treating
the forest with respect,
and there were certain penalties
if you chopped down a tree
or chopped off a branch.
It was a very interesting
civilization of the forest,
you could call it.
And then, of course, the
British came in in the 1500s
and had a growing
economy of goods,
and they cut down a
lot of the oak trees
to make barrels
and barrel staves.
REGINA MEREDITH: There are
poems and songs about this.
Right, and to build
ships and to make money.
And so-- and they cut
down the trees as well
to deprive the rebels
of a hiding place,
because the Irish
fought fiercely
to keep the British out.
And if they didn't
have woods, they
didn't have a place to hide.
I mean, it's akin to the killing
of the bison in North America
to deprive the Indians
of something to eat.
And so-- but in
there, it was trees,
because trees were everything to
the forest culture of Ireland.
And one of the
interesting things
is that the Sinn Fein,
the rebel-- rebels now,
one of the platforms-- one of
their planks in their platform
is to restore the native--
the forests of Ireland--
and the oak forest.
REGINA MEREDITH:
You've been there.
I've been there,
and there are people
out there trying to do that.
They are laboring against
commercial forest growers,
and most of Ireland has
no native forest-- 99%
percent of it.
There are a few pockets.
But those forests
that have been planted
are all exotic species
that are planted to grow
fast so they can harvest.
REGINA MEREDITH: Right.
More of a monoculture.
Right, but I did visit one
of the old-- old-growth oak
forests, and it is
absolutely astounding,
the feel you get in that place--
the canopy and the trees.
And it's just--
-Reading about it--
It's transportive.
REGINA MEREDITH: I can smell it.
I can feel it and smell it.
JIM ROBBINS: Yes,
you can smell it.
You know, I was in Rio recently.
I did a TED talk
there about this.
And I walked through Rio,
and its cacophonous and buses
and people and buildings,
and I hit this park,
and I was with a
couple of people.
I had been talking about trees.
And walking into
this park, it was
like going from night into day.
It was just-- it
was calm and quiet,
and the trees were everywhere.
And you could breathe all of
a sudden and relax and let go,
and there's a lot to show-- a
lot to show that the trees are
just absolutely
transformative when
it comes to the human species.
REGINA MEREDITH:
Well, by this time,
you're probably
preaching to the choir.
I can't imagine anyone
is not saying, yeah,
we need to protect the trees.
So let's get back
to David's project.
He did end up with
an angel donor.
I mean, a wonderful
thing happened.
He was a tough, old guy.
But in spite of himself,
he was able to attract
enough money to really
get this program rolling.
So let's talk about what's
happened over the last 10 years
with the program,
and where it is now.
We have about five minutes left.
So I think we'd like to know
what's going on with it-- what
varieties of trees
have been cloned,
where some successful
transplants have taken place.
Bring us up to speed.
Well, David struggled for
a long time on a shoestring
to keep the project going, and
finally, he met this woman who
wrote a check and did it right.
I mean, we flew to
Ireland on her private jet
in order to collect
the first Irish clones,
and we went to
California several times
to collect redwoods.
And they've got between 60
and 70 different species now
that they've cloned,
and they've just raised
a lot more money to do this.
So things are going.
And they're growing these clones
in California and Michigan,
and they're getting
ready to plant.
And they're going to plant
the first redwood-- old growth
redwood forest in Oregon in
December-- early December--
and try to restore new forests
with old growth genetics.
One of the things
David would love to do
is plant an old growth forest
in Golden Gate Park in San
Francisco so that these
trees can have their benefits
to people who live
in the cities, which
is where most people live.
REGINA MEREDITH: Absolutely.
The whole idea is not
a forest in the city,
but a city in the forest.
If you've ever been
to Mill Valley--
REGINA MEREDITH: Yeah, I used
to live there too, beautiful.
It's a small city
in the forest.
There are redwood
trees everywhere.
REGINA MEREDITH: I used to
meditate in little fairy
ring in the park there.
JIM ROBBINS: Right,
it's breathtaking.
Yeah, it is.
JIM ROBBINS: Well, why can't all
of our cities and urban areas
be like that or
something like that?
And so that's the thinking
is these trees need to be
around people to help people.
And so that's one of the
dreams that he has is
old-growth genetics in places--
REGINA MEREDITH:
In populated areas.
--in places where people
live-- suburbs and cities.
REGINA MEREDITH: What
about the whole notion
we talked about in
the beginning, which
was that these trees
needed to go into areas
that they're not indigenous to?
I mean, all along the California
coast and Mill Valley upwards,
they're indigenous-- redwoods
are indigenous to that region.
But I thought I
had read that there
has been some successful
planting or attempts in Turkey?
JIM ROBBINS: Oh, yes,
redwoods have been
planted all over the world.
REGINA MEREDITH: And there
are redwoods in China?
And the don't-- they
don't cause problems.
They don't spread as
an exotic species.
So they're growing in France.
They're growing in England.
REGINA MEREDITH: Oh,
that's heartwarming.
Yeah.
And I want to say one
thing about planting trees,
you know, there's a lot of bad
news in the world these days.
But climate change is
probably chief among them.
But I think that planting
trees is important.
It's something we can do.
We have this emotional
connection to trees,
and we can go out, and we
can do something today.
We could do something tomorrow.
We can go out and plant a tree.
And I think that's important.
I think it's hopeful.
I think it's more
important than we know.
It can help do a whole range
of things, some of which
I talked about-- some of
which I haven't gotten to.
But it also is
something that everyone
can do from little
children to old people
and make a positive-- a positive
statement about the future.
REGINA MEREDITH: Absolutely,
it can even become part
of your community planning.
And one city that exemplifies
this is Sacramento, California.
JIM ROBBINS: Right.
REGINA MEREDITH: Every year, I
mean, I stopped counting at 17,
and that was a
number of years ago,
they would win the
National Arbor Day Award,
and it was specifically
because of their tree
planting campaigns that
were very aggressive
starting in the 1960s.
They had these just
decimated lands
that had been
denuded of anything
and put tract housing in, which
was popular post-World War II,
and they would require as
you bought-- a homeowner--
they would require
that you have x number
of trees in your yards.
But they would
supply you with them.
They'd come around to
the homeowner and say,
you need at least three trees
in this amount of space.
Which varieties would you like?
And the utility department
actually planted those trees.
We can do some modified
version of that anywhere really
through any city or town.
That's right.
It's easier than we think.
And you know, the poet W.S.
Merwin, who is a poet laureate
of the United States,
and he called me when
the book came out, loved it.
It was about 30 copies of it.
But he said on the
last day of the world
I should want to plant a tree.
And I think that that is--
it goes to the heart of this
that trees are hope.
Trees are love in some ways.
Trees are-- trees are our
companions on this planet.
And we need to
take care of them.
REGINA MEREDITH: They take
care of us, and on that note,
thank you so much, and
there are so many things
we didn't have time to get to.
But thank you so much
for writing this book
and coming here and
sharing it today.
You're welcome.
If you resonate
with the project,
you can become involved,
searching online
for the Archangel
ancient tree archive,
you'll be able to find a lot
of information to hook into.
Meanwhile, I highly
recommend that you
pick up a copy of Jim's book--
"The Man Who Planted Trees."
It seems to carry a
magical kind of pace.
There's something
embedded of its own,
and it's going to inspire you
to increase your relationship
with the trees around you.
So until next time, thank you
so much for joining us here
on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]